Microsoft’s most asked interview questions
4) Given two linked lists that represent two big numbers (numbers that can not be stored in an int or long long int), write a function that adds the numbers and store the result in a third list.
Variations of above question like subtract two numbers or multiply two numbers represented by linked lists.

5) Print last 100 lines of a big file or big string.

6) Clone a linked list with next and arbit(or random) pointer.

7) Connect nodes at same level.

8) Least common ancestor of a binary tree or a binary search tree.

9) Test case questions like test an ATM.

10) Run length encoding.

11) Detect cycle in a linked list.

12) Given a sorted array of size n. Each element in array is unique and lies from 1 to n+1. Find the missing element. Write code and test cases for the same.

13) Check if a binary tree is balanced.

14) Validate a given IP address.

15) Why do you want to join Microsoft?

16) Two of the nodes of a BST are swapped. Correct the BST.

17) Draw a circle without floating point arithmetic

Amazon’s most asked interview questions
May 15, 2014

3) Binary tree traversal questions like left view, right view, top view, bottom view, maximum of a level, minimum of a level, children sum property, diameter etc.

4) Convert a BST into a DLL and DLL to BST in place.

5) Vertical traversal of a Binary Tree.

6) Lowest Common ancestor in a Bianry Search Tree and Binary Tree.

7) Implement a stack with push(), pop() and min() in O(1) time.

8) Reverse a linked list in groups of size k.

9) Given two numbers represented by two linked lists, write a function that returns sum list.

10) Rotate a matrix by 90 degree.

11) Some stack based questions like stock span problem, next greater element.

12) Some Dynamic Programming problems like maximum sum subarray, maximum sum subarray such that no elements are consecutive, edit distance, assembly line scheduling.

13) Why Amazon?

14) Questions about projects done in previous company or final year.